arXiv:2510.19890v1 [cs.CR] 22 Oct 2025

Deep Sequence-to-Sequence Models for
GNSS Spoofing Detection
1st Jan Zelinka

2nd Oliver Kost

3rd Marek Hrúz

Department of Cybernetics
University of West Bohemia
Pilsen, Czech Republic
zelinka@kky.zcu.cz

Department of Cybernetics
University of West Bohemia
Pilsen, Czech Republic
kost@kky.zcu.cz

Department of Cybernetics
University of West Bohemia
Pilsen, Czech Republic
mhruz@kky.zcu.cz

Abstract—We present a data generation framework designed
to simulate spoofing attacks and randomly place attack scenarios
worldwide. We apply deep neural network-based models for
spoofing detection, utilizing Long Short-Term Memory networks
and Transformer-inspired architectures. These models are specifically designed for online detection and are trained using the
generated dataset. Our results demonstrate that deep learning
models can accurately distinguish spoofed signals from genuine
ones, achieving high detection performance. The best results are
achieved by Transformer-inspired architectures with early fusion
of the inputs resulting in an error rate of 0.16%.
Index Terms—GNSS spoofing detection, deep learning, LSTM,
transformers, synthetic data generation

I. I NTRODUCTION
Unencrypted civilian global navigation satellite system
(GNSS) signals are vulnerable to spoofing attacks, which
pose a significant threat. Detecting such attacks is crucial for
ensuring the security. However, obtaining real-world spoofing
attack data is challenging, and acquiring a diverse dataset with
heterogeneous scenarios from different locations across the
globe is even more difficult.
To address this issue, we designed and implemented a data
generation framework capable of simulating two distinct types
of spoofing attacks. Our generator places attack scenarios at
random locations on Earth and accounts for various signal
conditions, including the presence of missing satellite signals.
This enables the creation of a diverse and realistic dataset
suitable for training machine learning models.
We applied deep neural network-based models to detect
spoofing attacks, utilizing both Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) networks and architectures inspired by modern Transformers. We have specifically designed the models to function
as online spoofing detectors. Using our generated dataset, we
trained and evaluated the models, assessing their effectiveness in distinguishing clean signals from spoofed ones. Our
results demonstrate the feasibility of applying deep learning
techniques to high-quality online spoofing detection.
II. R ELATED W ORKS
Various machine learning and deep learning approaches
have been proposed for detecting spoofing attacks. Several
The work was partially supported by the project TM04000019 ”Robust
Navigation System” of the Technology Agency of the Czech Republic.

studies have explored the use of neural networks, demonstrating their effectiveness [1]–[5]. Among these, multi-layer perceptron models have been employed [6]–[8]. LSTM networks
have been widely utilized for anomaly detection [9], [10].
Some works combine LSTM networks with convolutional neural networks (CNN) [11] or using CNN-based approaches [7],
[12].
III. N OMINAL /U NSPOOFED PSR S IGNALS
The GNSS measurement of corrected1 pseudo-range (PSR)
for the l-th satellite at time instant k under nominal (i.e.,
unspoofed) conditions has the following form [13]:
ρlk = ||plk − pk || + bk + ξkl + σkl ,

(1)

for l = 1, 2, · · · , Lk , where pk is the position and bk is the
clock bias of the receiver, plk is the position of the l-th satellite,
and Lk is the number of satellites visible from the receiver
position at time instant k.
The PSR contains two types of noise, σkl and ξkl , where
both have zero-mean and are independent between satellites.
However, the noise σkl is independent in time (white) and the
noise ξkl is time-correlated. The time correlation is attributed to
gradual changes in the atmosphere through which the GNSS
signals pass. The variances σkl and ξkl are functions of the
elevation angle of the l-th satellite [13], [14].
IV. S POOFING AND P ROPOSED D ETECTION C ONCEPT
A GNSS receiver processes signals transmitted by GNSS
satellites orbiting at around 20,000 km high altitudes. Therefore, the received signals are weak, which makes them susceptible to interference. The intentional interference 2 includes:
• Jamming, where a strong signal overwhelms or blocks
GNSS signals, prevents a victim’s receiver from determining its position estimate. This causes the navigation
system to switch to another mode (e.g., inertial or terrain
navigation [13]).
1 Corrections of satellite clock error, relativistic effect, ionosphere, and
troposphere delays, etc., based on user-defined-model are applied.
2 For example, in 2011, Iran successfully managed to deceive a US
drone with spoofed GNSS signals and let the drone land on its territory
(https://threat.technology/top-10-gps-spoofing-events-in-history/). Currently,
Ukraine, the Baltic countries, and Poland are witnessing massive jamming
and spoofing of GNSS signals due to the military conflict triggered by Russia.

•

Spoofing, where fake GNSS signals are sent to trick a
victim’s receiver into calculating an incorrect position,
velocity, or time estimate (PVT solution). Spoofing can
thus impair GNSS integrity, a key property determining
the reliability, accuracy, and credibility of the provided
estimates. This can result in fatal consequences, so it
should be detected. Figure 1 illustrates GNSS signal
spoofing.

Unspoofed
scenario

B. Regional spoofing

Spoofed
scenario

Spoofed
signal
Spoofer’s antenna

Victim’s antenna Spoofer’s antenna

Victim’s antenna .

Fig. 1. Illustration of (un)spoofed GNSS signals.

V. G ENERATOR OF S POOFED PSR S IGNALS : TARGETED
AND R EGIONAL
Consider two types of spoofing attacks: the first is targeted
at a single receiver, while the second affects all receivers in a
given region near the spoofer. Both types of spoofing attacks
modify GNSS signals received by an aircraft moving along a
trajectory that follows the pattern described in [15]. However,
the position of the aircraft’s trajectory and the runway is not
fixed, and the aircraft lands from any direction at any location
on Earth for different simulations. Moreover, consider that
the aircraft follows a nominal/unspoofed trajectory during the
entire flight, and the spoofing attack modifies only the GNSS
signals received by the aircraft. Note that the spoofer knows
his (static) position in both types of spoofing attacks.
A. Targeted spoofing
The targeted spoofing attack involves the spoofer attacking
one specific victim and shifting his position via spoofed PSR
signals. The shift of the spoofed trajectory from the nominal
(unspoofed) trajectory is smooth. The duration of the spoofed
attack ranges from 100s to 568s. In the middle of the nominal
trajectory, the spoofed trajectory is shifted from the nominal
one by 300m to 1000m as is illustrated in Figure 2.
12min 48s (768s)
568s
62m/s (∼120kt)
Ground speed
Nominal
trajectory
1000m

915m (∼3000ft)

15m (∼50ft)
17409m (∼9,4Nm)
Runway
150m

To carry out a targeted spoofing attack, the spoofer needs
to estimate the victim’s position (e.g., using radar) as well
as the GNSS time and PSR correlated noises (e.g., by measuring nominal GNSS signals and using a Kalman filter on
the spoofer side), and potentially other estimates. Since the
victim’s PVT solution may not exhibit significant deviations
before and during the spoofing attack, the errors in these
estimates contribute to distinguishing the spoofed GNSS signal
from the nominal signal.

Spoofer position

50m

Fig. 2. Illustration of targeted spoofing trajectories. The red lines are examples
of spoofing trajectories, and the blue dashed lines indicate the area where
spoofed trajectories might occur.

The regional spoofing attack does not target a single victim
but the entire region where the spoofer transmits one set of
(untargeted) spoofed PSR signals for all victims occurring in
this region. The spoofed trajectory is generated by taking a part
of the nominal (unspoofed) trajectory of duration 100s to 568s.
The whole part of the trajectory is shifted from the middle of
the nominal trajectory by 300m to 1000m. In addition, the
spoofed trajectory is horizontally rotated by ±20◦ around the
middle of the nominal trajectory as is illustrated in Figure 3.

12min 48s (768s)
568s
62m/s (∼120kt)
Ground speed
Nominal
trajectory
1000m

915m (∼3000ft)

20◦

15m (∼50ft)

17409m (∼9,4Nm)
Runway
150m

Spoofer position

50m

Fig. 3. Illustration of regional spoofing trajectories. The red lines are examples
of spoofing trajectories, and the blue dashed lines indicate the area where
spoofed trajectories might occur.

Compared to a targeted spoofing attack, a regional one needs
almost3 no estimates. Therefore, the spoofed GNSS signal may
be more difficult to detect during the attack, but on the other
hand, it can be easily detected at the beginning and end of the
spoofing attack, where step changes occur (see Figure 3).
VI. I NPUT S IGNALS P ROCESSING
In this section, we describe the preprocessing of input
signals, enabling the use of neural network-based models. In
our context, ρ represents the PSR measurement, which is the
apparent distance between a satellite and a receiver based on
the time delay of the received signal (1).
There are several key challenges in using ρ as an input for
an artificial neural network: signal is not always present, its
magnitude varies significantly, and the most relevant information is encoded in its small fluctuations over time despite its
overall large magnitude. These issues prevent ρ from being
used directly as an input.
3 For example, as in this article, GNSS time estimation can be used.

We addressed the issue of missing signals by not only using
a single value of ρ but also incorporating an indicator variable
with a value of 0 or 1 to denote its presence or absence.
Using the raw ρ value as input would directly lead to gradient vanishing or exploding due to significant differences in
magnitude. Standard normalization techniques, such as batch
normalization, do not fully resolve this issue, as they reduce
magnitude variation but also diminish valuable information
contained in small temporal variations in the network’s signals.
Employing the second difference mitigates this problem by
emphasizing subtle fluctuations while removing the influence
of the overall large magnitude of ρ.
In the context of a vehicle using GNSS, the second difference of ρ is correlated with the acceleration of the vehicle.
This means that analyzing the second difference of ρ allows
us to detect variations in the vehicle’s motion, such as false
sudden acceleration that could be caused by a spoofing attack
(see Figure 4).
10 7

pseudo-range

2.28
2.275
2.27
2.265
2.26
0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

diﬀerence

-100
-200
-300

the second diﬀerence

-400
0
10

VII. A PPROACHES TO S IGNAL F USION
We have data from a variable number of satellites. The data
can be processed independently for each satellite, with the
results subsequently combined, or they can be aggregated into
a single vector of constant dimension by applying padding
to match the maximum number of satellites, allowing for
processing using a single model. The first approach is referred
to as late fusion, while the second as early fusion.
In the case of early fusion, indicators of signal presence
are included in the inputs, allowing the applied models to
determine which parts of each signal to use. For late fusion
with transformers, these indicators can be incorporated in
two ways: either by including them in the input or by using
them for attention masking to directly prevent the model from
processing missing signals.
The advantage of late fusion is its ability to process a
variable number of satellites, while early fusion enables a
direct combination of signals from different satellites during
processing.
VIII. S EQUENCE - TO -S EQUENCE M ODEL

5
0
-5
-10

where λi are learnable scaling parameters that control the
sharpness of the distribution. The key advantage of this
approach is that the quantization process can be pretrained as
an autoencoder once and subsequently used across different
models. We performed this pretraining using a linear layer
for reconstruction and the mean squared error criterion. The
pretrained quantizer was then employed in all our experiments.

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

time

Fig. 4. An example illustrating PSR and its differences.

The second difference retains a significant amount of useful
information but also amplifies noise, including quantization
noise. We do not apply explicit smoothing, assuming that
employed machine learning models can inherently learn and
perform the necessary smoothing during training. The second
difference can still have a large magnitude (usually caused by
some irregularity of the signal), thus we apply a transformation
to compress its range f (x) = sign(x) · ln(1 + |x|). For small
values of x, it behaves approximately linearly, ensuring smooth
transitions near zero. For large values, it grows logarithmically,
reducing the impact of extreme magnitudes while preserving
the sign of x.
Modern models of sequence processing neural networks
require the inputs to be embedded into a vector representation.
Instead of ineffective projecting a single value y = f (x)
through a linear transformation to construct an embedding
vector, we quantize it with N values and express it as a
probability distribution over a set of learnable quantized values
qi . These probabilities p(y) are computed as follows:
p(y) = softmax([λ1 ∥y − q1 ∥, . . . , λN ∥y − qN ∥]),

(2)

We compared two methods for capturing long-range dependencies in sequential data: LSTM networks and the MultiHead Attention (MHA) mechanism. We use only the selfattention component of the MHA mechanism as described in
the literature [16].
While LSTMs inherently maintain causality by processing
information sequentially from past to future, the MHA mechanism enforces causality through masking. This masking not
only ensures that each time step attends only to previous
positions but also enables the exclusion of missing signals
from computation. This allows input signals to be processed
without the need to explicitly include missing signal indicators
in the inputs.
The MHA mechanism enables the processing of data from
multiple satellites even in late fusion by extending the attention
mechanism to attend not only to different time steps of the
same satellite but also to data from other satellites. To reduce
computational demands, we restrict the attention mechanism
for different satellites to only consider data from the same
time step, excluding interactions between different satellites
across different time steps. However, in models with multiple
layers utilizing MHA, this restriction does not strictly prevent
the processing of cross-satellite temporal dependencies, as
information can still be propagated through successive layers.
When computing attention, the primary objective of using
positional embeddings is to utilize not only variations in the
embedded signal values at different positions but also the

Confidence

Confidence

Linear

Linear

Output Sequence
Encoder

Add & Norm
Feed
Forward

Nx

Add & Norm
Time-Satellite
Attention

Input Sequence

explicitly modeling the competition between classes, which
can improve the robustness of the training process. The second
score is disregarded after applying the softmax function, as the
result is fully determined by the first one.
In the case of early fusion, generating a resultant score
poses no issue, as a vector with a fixed number of elements
can be directly converted into a score. However, in the case
of late fusion, the number of vectors varies. To address this,
we employ a simplified attention mechanism. This mechanism
computes an individual output and an associated weight for
each vector separately. The final output is computed as follows: first, the individual weights wi are collected, and the
softmax function is applied. These weights are then used to
compute a weighted average of the individual outputs yi . Finally, the softmax function is applied to generate the resultant
scores y. Formaly for n satellites: v = softmax([w1 , . . . wn ]),
y = softmax([v1 y1 , . . . , vn yn ]). This approach ensures that
the contributions of different inputs are adaptively weighted.

Positional
Encoding
Satellite
Encoding
Linear

Linear

Satellites0

Satellites1

Fig. 5. Illustration of the proposed multi-headed attention-based module for
satellite sequence data processing. Input is a sequence of satellite embeddings
in every time step. Output is the confidence of spoofing in that time step.

positional differences themselves. Therefore, in our case, it
is essential to employ two distinct positional embeddings: one
for time and another for the satellite index.
In the case of early fusion with MHA, the embedding
vectors incorporate data from all satellites. This ensures that
interactions between different satellites are already encoded
within the input representation, eliminating the need for explicit cross-satellite attention during processing.
We utilized a standard module (see Fig. 5) in which the
input is first processed by a selected layer, either an LSTM or
a MHA mechanism. The processed output is then combined
with the original input through a residual connection and
subsequently normalized using layer normalization. This is
followed by a feed-forward network, which is also enhanced
with a residual connection and layer normalization, applied in
the same manner. This approach leverages residual connections and layer normalization to mitigate vanishing gradient
issues. By incorporating either LSTM or MHA, the model
can effectively capture sequential dependencies.
The detection output is a continuous score ranging from 0 to
1 for each time point. Instead of one score value, our models
generate two values, apply a softmax function, and train using
cross-entropy loss. This approach offers the advantage of

IX. E XPERIMENTS AND R ESULTS

We generated a substantial corpus of over 67,000 sequences
of PSR for training and an additional 1,000 sequences for
testing. The test set contains 21.96 % of spoofed signal. We
believe that this dataset will provide the necessary foundation
for training models, which often require extensive data.
Our dataset provides a unique opportunity for a specialized
training approach that cannot be replicated using datasets
derived solely from real-world measurements. During each
gradient computation, the model receives two sets of ρ measurements: one containing a spoofing attack within a restricted
time interval and another with identical measurements but
without any attack. This setup enables the training process
to develop models that are more explicitly focused on distinguishing relevant information.
In our setup, we used an embedding dimension of 128. The
number of neurons in the hidden layers of the feed-forward
networks was 1024, and we utilized 8 heads in the MHA
mechanism. Our experiments consisted of four configurations:
LSTM-based models with early fusion, MHA-based models
with early fusion, LSTM-based models with late fusion, and
MHA-based models with late fusion. For each configuration,
we optimized the number of layers required for effective
detection. Specifically, we evaluated encoder architectures
with module counts (see Figure 5) ranging from 1 to 8
(see Figure 6). A summary of our results are in Table I.
Performance was evaluated by calculating the classification
error.

TABLE I
S UMMARY OF THE RESULTS COMPARING THE TWO PROPOSED MODEL
ARCHITECTURES AND THE TWO FUSION STRATEGIES .
Model
LSTM
Early F.
MHA
Early F.
LSTM
Late F.
MHA
Late F.

Targeted att.

Regional att.

Total

err = 0.44 %
fa = 0.25 %
md = 0.19 %
err = 0.31 %
fa = 0.11 %
md = 0.20 %
err = 0.70 %
fa = 0.50 %
md = 0.20 %
err = 0.46 %
fa = 0.34 %
md = 0.11 %

err = 0.01 %
fa = 0.01 %
md = 0.00 %
err = 0.03 %
fa = 0.00 %
md = 0.03 %
err = 0.26 %
fa = 0.26 %
md = 0.00 %
err = 0.26 %
fa = 0.26 %
md = 0.00 %

err = 0.21 %
fa = 0.12 %
md = 0.09 %
err = 0.16 %
fa = 0.05 %
md = 0.11 %
err = 0.47 %
fa = 0.38 %
md = 0.10 %
err = 0.35 %
fa = 0.30 %
md = 0.05 %

LSTM/Early
MHA/Early
LSTM/Late
MHA/Late

0.6

Classiﬁcation Error [%]

0.55
0.5
0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
3

4

5

6

7

8

Number of Encoder Modules

Fig. 6. Classification error for different model configurations and number of
encoder modules (N in Fig. 5).

In our experiments, we set a threshold of 0.5 for the
predicted scores to identify spoofing attacks. We evaluated
the model’s performance by calculating the classification error,
false alarm (FA) rate, and missed detection (MD) rate. Since
our dataset includes an equal distribution of two distinct
types of spoofing attacks, we assessed the model on three
different sets: a subset containing only targeted attacks, a
subset consisting only of regional attacks, and the entire
dataset. Targeted attacks alter signals slowly and in small
increments, while regional attacks modify signals in a single
step.
Our results indicate that MHA-based models outperform
LSTM-based models. Additionally, the early fusion strategy
proved to be the most effective. It is expected that regional
attacks are detected with a higher error rate.
X. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented a generator specifically designed
for spoofing attacks. This generator was used to create a large
dataset containing a diverse range of examples of various
spoofing attacks. We utilized this dataset to train deep machine
learning models for spoofing detection, addressing challenges
such as missing signals. We developed a specialized input
signal coding system and a modified attention mechanism.

Our experiments demonstrated that spoofing attacks could be
detected by online detectors with high accuracy. However,
it needs to be noted that the demonstration was performed
on simulated data and the real-world application should be
investigated further.
R EFERENCES
[1] S. C. Bose, “GPS spoofing detection by neural network machine
learning,” IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Systems Magazine, vol. 37,
no. 6, pp. 18–31, 2022.
[2] N. Xue, L. Niu, X. Hong, Z. Li, L. Hoffaeller, and C. Pöpper, “DeepSIM:
GPS spoofing detection on UAVs using satellite imagery matching,”
in Proceedings of the 36th Annual Computer Security Applications
Conference, ser. ACSAC ’20. New York, NY, USA: Association for
Computing Machinery, 2020, p. 304–319.
[3] M. Nayfeh, Y. Li, K. A. Shamaileh, V. Devabhaktuni, and N. Kaabouch,
“Machine learning modeling of GPS features with applications to uav
location spoofing detection and classification,” Computers & Security,
vol. 126, p. 103085, 2023.
[4] Y. Dang, C. Benzaı̈d, B. Yang, T. Taleb, and Y. Shen, “Deep-ensemblelearning-based GPS spoofing detection for cellular-connected uavs,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 9, no. 24, pp. 25 068–25 085,
2022.
[5] Y. Liu, J. Wang, S. Niu, and H. Song, “Deep learning enabled reliable
identity verification and spoofing detection,” in Wireless Algorithms,
Systems, and Applications, D. Yu, F. Dressler, and J. Yu, Eds. Cham:
Springer International Publishing, 2020, pp. 333–345.
[6] Y. Dang, C. Benzaı̈d, B. Yang, and T. Taleb, “Deep learning for GPS
spoofing detection in cellular-enabled UAV systems,” in 2021 International Conference on Networking and Network Applications (NaNA),
2021, pp. 501–506.
[7] O. Jullian, B. Otero, M. Stojilović, J. J. Costa, J. Verdú, and M. A.
Pajuelo, “Deep learning detection of GPS spoofing,” in Machine Learning, Optimization, and Data Science. Cham: Springer International
Publishing, 2022, pp. 527–540.
[8] A. Almadhor, J. Baili, S. Alsubai, A. Hejaili, R. Kulhanek, and S. Abbas,
“CTDNN-spoof: compact tiny deep learning architecture for detection
and multi-label classification of GPS spoofing attacks in small uavs,”
Scientific Reports, vol. 15, 02 2025.
[9] R. Calvo-Palomino, A. Bhattacharya, G. Bovet, and D. Giustiniano,
“Short: LSTM-based GNSS spoofing detection using low-cost spectrum
sensors,” in 2020 IEEE 21st International Symposium on ”A World
of Wireless, Mobile and Multimedia Networks” (WoWMoM), 2020, pp.
273–276.
[10] X. Wei, Y. Wang, and C. Sun, “PerDet: Machine-learning-based UAV
GPS spoofing detection using perception data,” Remote Sensing, vol. 14,
no. 19, 2022.
[11] P. Jiang, H. Wu, and C. Xin, “DeepPOSE: Detecting GPS spoofing
attack via deep recurrent neural network,” Digital Communications and
Networks, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 791–803, 2022.
[12] Y.-H. Sung, S.-J. Park, D.-Y. Kim, and S. Kim, “GPS spoofing detection
method for small UAVs using 1D convolution neural network,” Sensors,
vol. 22, no. 23, 2022.
[13] P. Groves, Principles of GNSS, Inertial, and Multisensor Integrated
Navigation Systems, Second Edition. Artech, 03 2013.
[14] O. Kost, J. Dunı́k, O. Straka, and O. Daniel, “Identification of GNSS
measurement error: From time to elevation dependency,” IEEE Trans.
on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, vol. 59, no. 6, pp. 8931–8943,
2023.
[15] ED-259 - Minimum Operational Performance Standards for Galileo
- Global Positioning System - Satellite-Based Augmentation System
Airborne Equipment, Euroca, 2019.
[16] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,
L. u. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” in Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg,
S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett,
Eds., vol. 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.

